Autotracking Memoization (#615)
emberjs/rfcs: text/0615-autotracking-memoization.md

- Start Date: 2020-04-17
- Relevant Team(s): Ember.js
- RFC PR: https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/615
- Tracking: (leave this empty)

# Autotracking Memoization

## Summary

Provides a low-level primitive for memoizing the result of a function based on
autotracking, allowing users to create their own reactive systems that can

> respond to changes in autotracked state

Reviewer: ```suggestion
respond to changes in autotracked state.
```

```js
import { tracked } from '@glimmer/tracking';

> import { createCache, getValue } from '@glimmer/tracking/cache-primitive';

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
import { createCache, getValue } from '@glimmer/tracking/primitives/cache';
```
This makes the import consistent with the rest of the document.

let count = 0;

class Person {
  @tracked firstName = 'Jen';
  @tracked lastName = 'Weber';

  #fullName = createCache(() => {

>     ++count;

Reviewer: Might be a bit more clear to call this `++computeCount`, what do you think?

    return `${this.firstName} ${this.lastName}`;
  })

  get fullName() {
    return getValue(this.#fullName);
  }
}

let person = new Person();

console.log(person.fullName); // Jen Weber
console.log(count); // 1;
console.log(person.fullName); // Jen Weber
console.log(count); // 1;

person.firstName = 'Jennifer';

console.log(person.fullName); // Jennifer Weber
console.log(count); // 2;
```

## Motivation

Autotracking is the fundamental reactivity model within Ember Octane, and has
been highly successful so far in its usage and adoption. However, users today
can only integrate with autotracking via the `@tracked` decorator, which allows
them to _create_ tracked root state. There is no way to write code that responds
to changes in that root state directly - the only way to do so is indirectly via
Ember's templating layer.

An example of where users might want to do this is the [`@cached`](https://github.com/emberjs/rfcs/pull/566)
decorator for getters. This decorator only reruns its code when the tracked

> state it accessed during its previous computation changes. Currently, it would
> not be possible to build this decorator with public APIs.

Reviewer: > Currently, it would not be possible to build this decorator with public APIs.

Is this actually true? Couldn't you use a combination of `computed` + `dependentKeyCompat`? I agree that it doesn't _really_ matter, but it would be good to avoid the absolutist terminology if it is actually not correct.

Maybe:

```suggestion
state it accessed during its previous computation changes. Currently, it would
be quite difficult and error prone to build this decorator with public APIs.
```

which allows users to define async tasks. Ember Concurrency has an `observes()`
API for tasks, which allows tasks to rerun when a property changes. This API is
not documented or encouraged, and instead lifecycle hooks are recommended to
rerun tasks. However, in Octane, lifecycle hooks on components are no longer
available, removing that as an option. A more ergonomic, autotracked version of
concurrency tasks could be created if users had a way to react to changes in
autotracked state.

Data layers like Ember Data could also benefit from this capability. These
layers tend to have to keep state in sync between multiple levels of caching,
which traditionally was done with computed properties and eventing systems. The
ability to use autotracking to replace these systems, and to define their own
reactive semantics, could help complex libraries and data layers out immensely.

## Detailed design

This RFC proposes four functions to be added to Ember's public API:

```ts
interface Cache<T = unknown> {}

function createCache<T>(fn: () => T): Cache<T>;

function getValue<T>(cache: Cache<T>): T

> 
> function isCache(maybeCache: object): boolean;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

function isConst(cache: Cache): boolean;
```

These functions are exposed as exports of the `@glimmer/tracking/primitives/cache`
module:

```ts
import {
  createCache,
  getValue,
  isCache,
  isConst,
} from '@glimmer/tracking/primitives/cache';
```

### Usage

> `cache` receives a function, and returns a cache instance for that function.

Reviewer 3: `createCache` receives a function ?

Reviewer: Yep, should be updated to 
 
```suggestion
`createCache` receives a function, and returns a cache instance for that function.
```

> Users can call `getValue()` on the cache instance to run the function and get

Reviewer: This seems a bit misleading, saying "can call getValue on the cache instance" infers that they can do:

```js
let cache = createCache(() => {})
cache.getValue();
```

But that is actually not what we are intending.

the value of its output. The cache will then return the same value whenever
`getValue` is called again, until one of the tracked values that was _consumed_
while it was running previously has been _dirtied_.

```ts
class State {
  @tracked value;
}

let state = new State();
let count = 0;

let counter = createCache(() => {
  // consume the state

>   state.value;

Reviewer 3: What about consuming multiple states, both of which are tracked?  This seems unnecessary in the context you have described in this RFC, but just curious!

```js
createCache(() => {
  state.value;
  state.otherValue;
});
```

Author: Right, if both of those values are tracked, and either of them were updated, then the cache would be invalidated.

  return ++computeCount;
});

getValue(counter); // 1
getValue(counter); // 1

state.value = 'foo';

getValue(counter); // 2
```

Getting the value of a cache also _consumes_ the cache. This means caches can be
nested, and whenever you use a cache inside of another cache, the outer cache
will dirty if the inner cache dirties.

```ts
let inner = createCache(() => { /* ... */ })

let outer = createCache(() => {
  /* ... */

  inner();
});
```

This can be used to break up different parts of a execution so that only the
pieces that changed are rerun.

> 
> The `isCache` function can be used to determine if a value is a cache, in cases
> where it's not possible to know if the value is a cache or not.
> 
> ```js
> let cache = createCache(() => {});
> let notACache = () => {};
> 
> isCache(cache); // true
> isCache(notACache); // false
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Constant Caches

Caches will only recompute if any of the tracked inputs that were consumed
previously change. If there _were_ no consumed tracked inputs, then they will
never recompute.

```ts
let count = 0;

let counter = createCache(() => {
  return ++count;
});

getValue(counter); // 1
getValue(counter); // 1
getValue(counter); // 1

// ...
```

When this happens, it often means that optimizations can be made in the code
surrounding the computation. For instance, in the Glimmer VM, we don't emit

> updating bytecodes if we detect that a memoized function is constant, because

Reviewer 3: It may make sense to further define `is constant`.  I think it shares the same properties in meaning as the JS construct "constant", but could be also gain further meaning.  Does it also mean "steady" or "invariable"?

Reviewer 3: Perhaps an additional adjective could be used in the docs section if you felt there was an improvement!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
updating bytecodes if we detect that a memoized function can never change, because
```

  return ++count;
});

getValue(counter);
getValue(constCounter);

isConst(counter); // false
isConst(constCounter); // true
```

It is not possible to know whether or not a cache is constant before its
first usage, so `isConst` will throw an error if the cache has never been
accessed before.

```ts

let constCounter = createCache(() => {
  return count++;
});

isConst(constCounter); // throws an error, `constCounter` has not been used
```

This helps users avoid missing optimization opportunities by mistake, since most
optimizations happen on the first run only. If a user calls `isConst` on the
function prior to the first run, they may assume that the function is
non-constant on accident.

## How we teach this

This topic is one that is meant for advanced users and library authors. It
should be covered in detail in the Autotracking In-Depth guide in the Ember
guides.

This guide should cover how memoization works, and various techniques for using
memoization. It should cover a variety of ways to use memoization to accomplish
common tasks of other reactivity systems. Pull-based reactivity is unfamiliar to
many programmers, so we should try to familiarize them with as many common

> examples as possible.

Reviewer 3: Agreed.  Even as we migrate applications over, I'm sometimes not applying `@tracked` in a condoned way

Some possibilities include:

- Building the `@cached` decorator from scratch.
- Building a data layer that syncs changes to models to localStorage or a
  backend in real time, as the changes occur (note: requires polling of some
  kind, or a component to do this).
- Building a `RemoteData` implementation, a helpful wrapper that sends a fetch
  request to a remote url and loads data whenever the url input changes.

### API Docs

> #### `cache`

Reviewer 3: `createCache`?

Reviewer: Yep, needs to be updated

```suggestion
#### `createCache`
```

Receives a function, and returns a wrapped version of it that memoizes based on
_autotracking_. The function will only rerun whenever any tracked values used
within it have changed. Otherwise, it will return the previous value.

```ts
import { tracked } from '@glimmer/tracking';
import { createCache, getValue } from '@glimmer/tracking/primitives/cache';

class State {
  @tracked value;
}

let state = new State();
let computeCount = 0;

let counter = createCache(() => {
  // consume the state. Now, `counter` will
  // only rerun if `state.value` changes.
  state.value;

  return ++computeCount;
});

getValue(counter); // 1

// returns the same value because no tracked state has changed
getValue(counter); // 1

state.value = 'foo';

// reruns because a tracked value used in the function has changed,
// incermenting the counter
getValue(counter); // 2
```

#### `getValue`

Gets the value of a cache created with `createCache`.

```ts
import { tracked } from '@glimmer/tracking';
import { createCache, getValue } from '@glimmer/tracking/primitives/cache';

let computeCount = 0;

let counter = createCache(() => {
  return ++computeCount;
});

getValue(counter); // 1
```

> #### `isCache`
> 
> Returns whether or not the value is a cache.
> 
> ```ts
> import { tracked } from '@glimmer/tracking';
> import { createCache, isCache } from '@glimmer/tracking/primitives/cache';
> 
> let cache = createCache(() => {});
> let notACache = () => {};
> 
> 
> isCache(cache); // true
> isCache(notACache); // false
> ```
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
